---
title: "2026-03-04 US NABCI Meeting"
author: "Scott K. Anderson"
date: "2026-03-04"
type: meeting-notes
organization: "United States North American Bird Conservation Inititive"
frequency: "semi-anually"
tags: []
---

# Follow Ups

* change default tab for markdown documents
* troubleshoot pandoc
* follow up with Cyrenea on AKN next steps, ARU stuff
* MD add thought bubbles?
* MD integrated YAML?
* Set up meeting with [Joanna Eckles](mailto:jeckles@abcbirds.org) ([Bird City Network](https://birdcity.org))
  * invite CC

## Communications Subcommittee Follow-Ups

### Foci (keep small)

1. Big Desire to map Bird Conservation!
2. Ease access to Translation services
3. Assist with website?

### Tasks

* Review HD work restarting
* Schedule meeting with Kelley and Justin
  * re-starting Comms
  * Social Network Analysis
* Connect with Todd, John, and Amy on what they think it looks like
* Develop the structure

# Wednesday (3/4)

## 9:00 am – Welcome and Chair Introductions

* Meeting yesterday - with Bird conservation leaders and USFWS. Call for us to do womething intentional to come together finally - desire to act as one ocmunity
  * will hold another meeting at least one more time.
  * Deputy Director (Justin "J" Shirley) is a birder

### Attendees

* Geoff Geupel - Point Blue
* Shaun Aldenburger - TPWD
* Tammy Vercauteren
* Todd Fearer - AMJV
* Annie Chester - ABC
* Joanna Eckles
Online
* Alicia Hardin
* Scot Hall
* Amanda Rodewald

Local DC Bird Alliance, Cornell, AOS, AZA

USDA FS missing

## 9:15 am – Coordinator Overview

Still listed as Comms Chair - need co-chair!

* Committee reps missing
  * TNC
  * USGS (Temporary)

## 9:30 am – Roundtable: Updates from Federal Partners

### USFWS

Jerome Ford

* "focused on benefits to the American public"
* 7 lines of efforts - introduced via podcast
* Have lost a lot of staff - 400 -> 200 FTE
* focusing on "unification"
* restructuring - can't talk about it
  * timeline? - none set - has been submitted 3 wks ago
* Funding - process for grant funding is much more onerous than previously
  * The authority for approval and payout is now moved to DOI
  * NMBCA - still with DO for approval, no NOFO for this year
* Consolidated all permit staff in HQ - temporary - working much more efficiently - hoping to make permanent.
  * still working on incorporating BAEA permititng in this structure
* Interagency/cooperative agreements with JVs - concerns

```yaml

ideas: 
  - Goal is on "benefits to the American Public" - where does conservation of non-game birds get felt the most by the public?

notes: 
  - Examples so far have been permits (some to allow habitat mgmt, scientific collection), while funding is languishing.

```

### USGS

Jenn Malpass

* BBl - 15 to 12 staff
* Will be present at the North American
* Problems with band supplies - Shaun suggested paying for bands - meet at North American

### NRCS

Danielle Flynn

* NR conservation through "whole farm planning"
  * identifying all resource concerns - return to basics
  * "regenerative pilot program" - participants must address all soil and water resource concernns
* 5 priorities
  * preserve protect ag land
  * infrastructure/technology - public use of NRCS needs new front end "one farmer, one file"
    * NRCS and FSA (EQUIP and other programs from one farmer in one file)
  * Get our conservaitn planners back in the field.
  * Bolster planning capacity and expertise through partnerships
  * Focus on outcomes: value of voluntary conservation, and provide measureable outcomes to producers
* Todd: quantifiable bird coutcomes?
  * current outcomes document could work. "not dollars and acres"
* Tammy: change in regional leaders - who are the regional leaders?
  * had regional conservationists - superviosors to state conservationists
  * regional conservationists now have a layer above
* Alicia: reiterate technical service providers

### DOW

Liz Neipert

* Efficiency focus, adding data and technology focus
* Conservation must tie to "lethality of the warfighter"
* Mission sensitive species - declining species that would have the greatest impact on the mission if listed.
* Would like to see threats and conservation actions with the BCC listings.
* Creating more standardized templates for INREPS
* Id strategic alignment for partners - stop working independently
  * Working on proposal for ESTCP with Cornell and other NGOs
  * Lots of agencies putitng out ARUs, want to assist with help
* Requires the use of AKN on lands and with DOW funding.
* Point Blue/KBO - avian distribution across land ownership
  * using data in AKN across jurisdictions (NASA funded)
  * Where does limited funding have the greatest impact?
  * Example: NOBO conservation on Fed lands will not move the needle - should move to funding private land conservation

```yaml
tasks: 
  - Cyrenea! DOW have resources for ARU data/processing? Get data into AKN

notes: 
  - Other "conservation" examples- making sure birds don't get in the way...
```

**Tammy - looking for ways to look across federal agencies to do work that is more efficient.**

Shaun - lots of industry folks giving to private lands programs (e.g., Hershey) - opportunity to highlight when national programs might have gotten in the way - perhaps can be changed.

John - bring in states and NGOs more - more support for Fed partners (like previously?)

* Opportunity for NABCI to reinfoce grassroots lessons learned - take Shaun's example(s) as a roadmap to implmenting
* AKN is an example - bottom up mandate, developed in partnership with an NGO

AZA rep - Storytelling to the general public - what is being shared internally - newsletter

* tell stories of success - key points, where to communicate among NABCI and 
* Bradley - relies on folks to use their time to contribute
* Shaun - NAWMP - decision-makers need to be sold to - include in discussion
* Bradley - some example-driven, creative inspired success stories - spent 8 months soliciting success stories for NRCS - **very** resource intensive - hard to come up with "general" ask for stories
* Tammy - JV fly-in - unified messaging - had landowners, industry speaking - can we leverage this model with how funds from private get leveraged - come in more than once a year?
* John - NABCI can't transmit success to everyone, AND to the Legistlature
  * NABCI = informal advisory committee
  * Visioning should look at which direction this org should feed info and our expectations for what is done with that information.
* Jerome - look forward - reimagine today's structure - don't hurry up to the fix - mind mapping - think in pictures
* John - How do we get from think-tank to action?
* Judy - how to message up?
* mike Green - are we aiming at the right target? Congress is the level we should be aiming at... Combined messaging that will resonate there. Not at agency heads/leads. State folks have the power to leverage at that level. Combined target.
* Jerome - not sure congress is the right target - can get behind winning stories. If we strategize - how to best tell our story (AFWA letters often don't result in anything).
* Todd - 
  * JVs were heere last week - have done these fly-ins - its figured out - last 6-7 years that have held steady or gotten successes. Focus on "12-34" - should be to both congress and leadership!
  * Don't let bperfect be the enmy o fhte good - don't need to wait until we have the right message/tools. Have some stories to share, can adjust to the admin priorities - bird conservation is non-partisan.
  * Take the JV model and adapt...
* Bradley - could have a "bird fly-in" in conjunction with NABCI meeting?!?!? Need partner support to organize.

```yaml
notes:
  - States cannot attend NABCI - what are the best way for states to be involved/partner
  - Jerome water bottle- "Conservation through the Arts"
ideas: 
  - using conservation-connectionst to determine who to invite to a meeting/project
```

### Feds not able to attend

* NPS
* USDA FS
* BLM

## 10:15 am – Workshop: Formalizing Processes for State of the Birds

Revisit this effort - what is the best frequency and focus for this report

* Amanda - don't think you could pull off the exising report within 1 year.
  * if you are trying to look at trends, not enough power to detect change on smaller interval
* John - agree
  * when doing annually - getting secretarial involvment in releases
  * might not be mutually exclusive to put out long-term and short-term
  * what makes a bird come off the list?
* Geoff - [Wild Bird Index](https://www.bto.org/our-work/science/publications/reports/indicators) of the BTO is a very powerful tool - great exmaple
  * lets streamline, tie to outcomes, at least annually
  * canned program that doesn't require new analysis, can change focus year-to-year
  * Example: common 3BB birds (EATO)
* Liz - metrics - define what we can report on metrics
  * see metrics on [AKN DOW portal - dashboard metrics](https://www.dodakn.org/reporting/dod-akn-progress-dashboard/).
* Shaun - used Tipping Point species for SGCN
* Eric - did not use SGCN for BCC, used ACAD
* Jerome - started every 5 years, then switched to 1 year
  * followed different theme/year
  * 5 year trend check-in, interim thematic reports
  * "State of the Birds" may be overused - those not steeped in bird cons hear it too much and don't see any changes (isn't that the same graph?)
* Mike Green - unify messaging, make it something different.
  * Conservation business strategy messaging? ROI.
* Tammy - SOTB beyond birds - Bringing water, sustaining water, birds are in the background
  * Jerome - incorporate people as well
  * Tammy - should include "funded by..."
* John - target audiences vs. target outcomes
* Jeff Walters
  * important to do trends periodically, 5 yrs sufficient
  * could also do individual spp that have been turned around - successes
* Bradley - if 5 year is the interval - should be linked to BCC list
  * needs coordination so the SOTB can follow on quickly after the BCC list publishing
  * SOTB gets triggered from BCC report process - will the BCC report contiunue to be a full report or return to being a list.
  * Jermoe - intention is to follow this new process in perpetuity
  * protocols needed
  * feels like reports are currently driven by capacity
* Sara - USFWS Wildlife Watcher report could be incorporated

```yaml

ideas: 
  - Cohesive plan of SOTB and interim thematic products - highlight successes, and explicitly tie to elements in SOTB - call back and call forward
tasks: 
  - Charge for Communications Subcommittee - ease access to translation services - service best practices and guide
```


## 11:30 am – Workshop: Identifying Uses for eBird Activity Data

Andrew Stillman

* bird habitat relationships
* scalable  bird status and trends
* esimating impacts

* ebird thinking about better ways to provide access to data
  * emphasis on people, not jus tbirds
  * Communication tool for economic, social, and recreation value
* methods
  * Observer effort hours for each week of year - 52 rasters
  * 2005 - 2024
  * Checklists <1km
  * Summaries
  * year maximum or year total
* [Current draft](https://sandbox.ebird.org/observer-effort) - not for public release
* John - Can it be used to get birders to move folks to undersurveyed areas???
* AZA - number of people could be great...
* Tool should be available mid-summer

## 1:30 pm – Workshop: Targeted Feedback for Birds of Conservation Concern Report

Dan Blake, Callie Gesmundo, Deb Kornblut, Jo Anna Lutmerding, Eric Kershner

Traditionally just a list, working to fulfill legislative mandate to include report.

```yaml
resources:
  BCC 2021 Report: https://www.fws.gov/media/birds-conservation-concern-2021
  PDF List: https://www.fws.gov/media/usfws-bird-species-concern
  USFWS Priority Bird Dashboard: https://www.arcgis.com/apps/dashboards/75fbf678e83348469e27d616d200228e
  BCC Legislation:
    Fish and Wildlife Conservation, 16 U.S.C. §§ 2901-2912 (1988): 
```

* Legislative mandate: The Congress finds and declares the following:
  1. Fish and wildlife are of ecological, educational, esthetic, cultural, recreational, economic, and scientific value to the Nation.
  2. The improved conservation and management of fish and wildlife, particularly nongame fish and wildlife, will assist in restoring and maintaining fish and wildlife and in assuring a productive and more esthetically pleasing environment for all citizens.
  3. Many citizens, particularly those residing in urban areas, have insufficient opportunity to participate in recreational and other programs designed to foster human interaction with fish and wildlife and thereby are unable to have a greater appreciation and awareness of the environment.
  4. Historically, fish and wildlife conservation programs have been focused on the more recreationally and commercially important species within any particular ecosystem. As a consequence such programs have been largely financed by hunting and fishing license revenues or excise taxes on certain hunting and fishing equipment. These traditional financing mechanisms are neither adequate nor fully appropriate to meet the conservation needs of nongame fish and wildlife.
  5. Each State should be encouraged to develop, revise, and implement, in consultation with appropriate Federal,State, and local and regional agencies, a plan for the conservation of fish and wildlife, particularly those species which are indigenous to the State.
* summarizeds the
  * status of mig nongame birds,
  * threats,
  * species at risk,
  * recommends actions,
  * key lands and waters
* report to congress!
* Why care about migratory nongame birds?
  * Primary audience: Congress
  * secondary: USFWS, public
* 5 mandates
  * monitoring/trends
  * human-caused threats
  * most at-risk
  * conservaiton actions
  * key lands and waters
* currently
  * running listening sessions
  * working on first complete draft
  * Prepping for July release
* Format/Overview
  * OMB Control # 1090-0012, expires 02/28/27
  * focus group format
* Uses on the report
  * prioritization
  * informing decisions
  * grant writing
  * SWAPS
* Barriers identified
  * list fatigue
  * broken links/difficult to find
  * difficulty navigating
* open to including data
* Shaun - will BCC match the WAP "Threats" and "Conservation Actions"?
  * Jerome - yes
  * Mike - yes, using Open Standards language
* Discussion
  * John - ACAD Funding: perhaps securing funding for ACAD through NABCI would be a good effort to bring the group together.

```yaml
tasks:
  - look up proposed DCCO legislation
  - Revist getting Open Standards skills
```

```yaml
nodes:
  project-open-standards-for-the-practice-of-conservation:
    short_key: posftpoc
    title: Open Standards for the Practice of Conservation
    type: project
    description: Methodology for determining conservation solutions by analyzing the system.
    tags: [open source, results chains]
  organization-united-states-fish-and-wildlife-service:
    short_key: usfws
    title: United States Fish and Wildlife Service
    type: organization
  report-birds-of-conservation-concern-report-2021:
    title: Birds of Conservation Concern-Report 2021
    type: report
    properties:
      url: https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/documents/birds-of-conservation-concern-2021.pdf
      has_author: united-states-fish-and-wildlife-service
edges:
  posftpoc|has_author|usfws:
    to: united-states-fish-and-wildlife-service
    from: report-birds-of-conservation-concern-report-2021
    type: has_author
    dir: 2

```

## Neotropical ornithology: Research and Perspectives from Latin America

[Steve Albert](mailto:salbert@birdpop.org) - IBP

Upcoming book from Johns Hopkins Press

## 3:00 pm – Human Dimension Subcommittee Work Plan

Justin Beall, Kelly Langhans, Ashley Dayer

* Visioning
  * serve as conveneing space for bird-related human dimensions efforts in order to support collaboration, shared learning, and help avoid duplication
    * identify/recruit
    * share work at meetings
    * provide space in meetings where folks can get feedback, brainstorms
    * creater resource repository for bird-related conservation social science
  * agenda setting for research topics, funding, collabs
    * clearinghouse of funding sources
    * lead development of group positionality statement
    * lead white paper on actionalble social science
  * Address the research to impementation gap
    * organize discussions iwth landowners/practitioners to help identify needs
  * Communication
    * list of resources
    * increase presence at new venues
* Alignment with NABCI
* Want to map existing bird conservation networks


```yaml
nodes:
  north-american-bird-conservation-initiative-human-dimensions:
    type:
      organization: committee
    timeline:
      2013: initial presentation, highlighted in newsletter
      2014: started 
      2017: hired coordinators, Ashley Gramsa, then Katie Holland, then 
      2018: What is Human Dimensions document, Success Stories web presence and webinar
      2019: Guide for using Human Dimensions in Joint Venture Implementation Plans
      2019: Conference presence (AOS), subsequent journal articles
      2021: 
        - Uprecedented coalition through co-production - 5 game changing paradigms
        - "Bird Conservation: a Human Endeavor"
      2023: Guide to Incorporating Socieal Sciene in Bird Conservation
      2025: "Current co-chairs: Kelley Langhans, Justin Beall"

```

```yaml
tasks: 
  - recruitment push like done for HD subcommittee
  - model coms reconstitution on HD work
  - review NABCI strategic plan
  - social network analysis lookup
```

# Thursday (3/5)

## 9:00 am – Public Lands Coalition Building

Evoled because of bill.

Organic coming together of different groups in protecting public lands. GA folks in NABCI identified an alignment. Folks working together who did not previously. Worked great for the specific issue, but didn't include the bird people. Prompted bird community to want to leverage this loose coalition for bird conservation issues.

* are we interested in partnering in short-term specific actions, or
* long-term relationship-building?

Outdoor recreation groups are often more effective on the Hill. Probably likely suspicious of courting their favor.

**Todays Question: What can we bring to them?**

* Hunter/Angler
* American Conservation Coalition - younger - have influence, but often don't know how the "conservation bureacracy" works.
  * do we have a role to help them understand
* Congressional Public Lands Caucus
* Mike Reynolds - McGee Marsh example - sell voluntary legacy stamps to support (500 stamps)
  * Birders benefitting from these things.

## Considerations

* Birders/Wildlife Watchers/Hiking/Outfitters
* Ranchers rely on public lands
* Bird community haven't done a good job of sending the messages
* Crosswalking threats - backcountry hunters

This is crucial - even hunting funding is declining as a % of WR funds. Hunters want to continue to 

Our Shared Funding Future is grim. Leadership to presenting a vision for multiple interests can work together to 

* 3BB message about waterfowl

Example: Duck Stamp included in price of bird festival

```yaml
  ideas: 
    - "Partner with Audubon on shared vision for habitat conservation. Joint Bird/Hunter program?"
  tasks: 
    - "add to KB: DU, Boone & Crockett, Congressional Caucuses, Congressional committees,"
```

## 10:00 am – Workshop: Revisiting the Vision

Revisiting the foundation/purpose of NABCI. Traditionally, a convener, clearninghouse, coordinator around bird initiatives.

* John
  * Should NABCI be a Fed Advisory Committee?
  * Scared of the initiatives going away
* Jeff Walters
  * needs to be more private $ in conservation, less gov $ in today's climate
* Todd, John, Jeff Walters
  * coordination not correct? More like integrating? Alignment?

### Waterbird Coordinator

All initiatives were based on a plan ([North American Waterbird Conservation Plan](https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/documents/north-america-waterbird-conservation-plan.pdf)).

* 4 year position
* draft updated CIS/Plan in that time
* Gathering input from all flyways
* Next flyway will present to councils

### COP15

Request to deliver waterbird popoulation updates for 2027

* what is needed to provide updated Waterbird populations for NA
* NABCI role in providing these?
* NABCI interested in proposing a representative to help with this?

```yaml
nodes:
  plan-north-american-waterbird-conservation-plan-2002:
    key: "plan-north-american-waterbird-conservation-plan-2002"
    title: "North American Waterbird Conservation Plan 2002"
    url: "https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/documents/north-america-waterbird-conservation-plan.pdf"
    citation: "James A. Kushlan , MelanieJ. Steinkamp, Katharine C. Parsons, Jack Capp, Martin Acosta Cruz, Malcolm Coulter, Ian Davidson , Loney Dickson, Naomi Edelson, Richard Elliot, R. Michael Erwin, Scott Hatch, Stephen Kress, Robert Milko, Steve Miller, Kyra Mills, Richard Paul , Roberto Phillips, Jorge E. Saliva , Bill Sydeman, John Trapp, Jennifer Wheeler, and Kent Wohl . 2002. Waterbird Conservation for the Americas : The North American Waterbird Conservation Plan, Version 1. Waterbird Conservation for the Americas, Washington, DC, U.S.A., 78 pp."
  plan-united-states-shorebird-conservation-plan-2016:
    key: "plan-united-states-shorebird-conservation-plan-2016"
    short_key: "usscp2016"
    title: "United States Shorebird Conservation Plan 2016"
    url: "https://www.shorebirdplan.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/PASCSv2_english_final.pdf"
    citation: "Senner, S. E., B. A. Andres and H. R. Gates (Eds.). 2016. Pacific Americas shorebird conservation strategy. National Audubon Society, New York, New York, USA. Updated and corrected, November 2017."
edges:
  usfws-published-nawcp2002:
    from: usfws
    to: nawcp2002
```


## 12:00 pm – Business Session



## 1:00 pm – End of Business Session; Additional Flex Time
